some bash commands - 

(We'll be using WSL (Windows Subsystem for linux))

1. pwd (print working diretory) - prints the diretory we currently are on 

2. cd (change diretory) - changes from one diretory to another 
   (use {  cd ..  } to go to the previous diretory)
   (use {  cd ../..  } to go back 2 diretory)

3.  ls (lists) - displays the content of the diretory

4. mkdir (make diretory) - makes a new diretory

5. touch - to make a file inisde a diretory (eg. touch index.txt wil make a file inside a diretory)

6. cat - prints the content of a file (example. cat index.txt will  display the ocntent of index.txt)

7. vi (vim command) - vim stands for Vi IMproved.
                      It’s a command-line text editor used to create or edit files in Linux/Unix environments
    HOW TO OPEN FILE IN VIM 

    vim fileName 

    eg. vim a.txt (if the file exists it opens the file if not it makes one)

Vim has three main modes:

MODE	         USE
Normal Mode	     For navigation & commands (default mode)
Insert Mode	     For typing text (like a regular editor)
Command Mode	 For saving, quitting, searching (starts with :)

Enter Insert Mode (to start typing):
Press i → Now you can type text.

Exit Insert Mode:
Press Esc

vim esc commands - 

:w → Save (write)

:q → Quit

:wq → Save and quit

:q! → Quit without saving

(Type ( : ) in normal mode, then the command, then press Enter)

8. mv (move) - moves files from one place to another  {eg.  mv a.txt new-folder (moves a.txt to new folder) }

9. cp (copy) - copies files from one position to another {eg. cp a.txt new-folder  (copies a.txt to new-follder) }
                                                        { to copy a folder user  cp -r test11 test22 (test11 gets copied into test22)}
                                                        here r stands for recursive 


10. node commands- 
    
    1. node - this cmd is use to code node files directly use crtl C to exit

    2. npm (node package manager) - helps u intall js libraries (cmd -> npm install (name of library))
    
     
