SQL vs NoSQL Databases
What is a Database?
A database is an organized collection of data that allows efficient storage, retrieval, and management of information.
Examples:
🡢 Student records
🡢 Banking information
🡢 E-commerce products
🡢 Social media user data

What is a Schema?
A schema is the blueprint or structure of a database that defines:
🡢 What fields (columns) exist
🡢 What type of data can be stored
🡢 Rules and constraints on the data


Example SQL Schema
CREATE TABLE Students (    ID INT,    Name VARCHAR(50),    Age INT);
The schema specifies:


ID → Integer


Name → Text


Age → Integer


Every record must follow this structure.

SQL Databases
SQL (Structured Query Language) databases store data in the form of tables consisting of rows and columns.
Example
IDNameAge1Aryan212Rahul22
Popular SQL Databases


MySQL


PostgreSQL


Oracle Database


Microsoft SQL Server


Advantages of SQL


Fixed and organized schema


Strong data consistency


Supports complex queries and joins


Reliable for critical applications


Applications


Banking systems


Payroll systems


Hospital management systems


Inventory management systems



NoSQL Databases
NoSQL (Not Only SQL) databases store data in flexible formats such as documents, key-value pairs, graphs, or wide-column structures.
Example MongoDB Document
{  "name": "Aryan",  "age": 21,  "skills": ["C++", "MongoDB"],  "address": {    "city": "Raipur"  }}
Popular NoSQL Databases


MongoDB


Cassandra


Redis


CouchDB



Why NoSQL is Preferred for Certain Tasks
Modern applications often have:


Large amounts of data


Frequently changing requirements


Millions of users


Different data formats


In such situations, NoSQL databases provide greater flexibility and scalability.
Example
Document 1:
{  "name": "Aryan",  "age": 21}
Document 2:
{  "name": "Rahul",  "age": 22,  "github": "rahul123",  "skills": ["Python"]}
Both documents can exist in the same collection without changing any predefined structure.

Why NoSQL is Better than SQL (Based on the Given Image)
The image highlights two major advantages of NoSQL databases:
1. Schema Flexibility
SQL databases require a fixed schema. Adding new fields often requires modifying the table structure.
Example:
ALTER TABLE StudentsADD Github VARCHAR(100);
NoSQL databases allow different documents to have different fields without changing any schema.
Benefit


Faster development


Easier adaptation to changing requirements


Suitable for dynamic applications



2. Scalability
SQL databases generally scale vertically by upgrading a single server with more CPU, RAM, or storage.
NoSQL databases are designed to scale horizontally by adding more servers and distributing data among them.
Benefit


Handles massive amounts of data


Supports millions of users


Suitable for cloud and distributed systems


Conclusion
SQL databases are best for applications requiring structured data, strong consistency, 
and complex relationships. NoSQL databases are preferred for modern large-scale 
applications because they provide schema flexibility and horizontal scalability, 
making them ideal for social media platforms, real-time applications, cloud services, 
and big data systems.